so dr k how do you become more decisive
in getting get over the fear of making
the wrong decision in life
i'm struggling with indecision lately
sometimes it is difficult for me to make
decisions on what to do on a daily
moment-to-moment basis it is also
difficult for me to decide what to do
next in my life
i get overwhelmed with all the options
and choices can't figure out what i
truly want anymore and i'm paralyzed by
a fear of making the wrong life choices
i feel as if i don't have freedom and
spontaneity i deliberate on things too
much and end up not making any decision
because i fear that i might start
something and end up not liking it and
then there'll be no way to get out of it
this happens more with big life
decisions like what direction to go in
next
i realize my indecision protects me from
not having to make a choice
but i feel that i've always been like
this as a kid i was easily overwhelmed
and would often have this feeling of
time running out and then i would throw
a tantrum because i felt because i felt
trapped as if the walls were closing in
on me today this feeling persists in my
decision making though not always as
strong
how do you become more decisive is there
some kind of exercise or practice that
would help with this indecision and fear
of making the wrong choice
so
the short answer is yes
so we're going to approach this from a
couple of different angles first we're
going to take
a yoga angle so nyani yoga is the path
of knowledge so we're going to examine
this
using like the ability of contemplation
the second thing that we're going to
reference is
sort of specifically what is going on
with this person
and where
this kind of indecision comes from
the third thing that we're going to
touch on is strategies to deal with in
indecision and the last thing we're
going to touch on is a meditation of
sorts
that will theoretically help with this
but it's a little bit more advanced
okay
so the first thing is so this person is
concerned about making the right
decision or the wrong decision so
what is a right decision or wrong
decision so that this is kind of the
path of nyan yog so anytime you're faced
with a difficulty in life what nyonyog
says is understand the nature of the
thing so we're not going to like fix it
we're just going to understand how it
works we're going to try to figure out
what are the laws of physics here like
what are the equations that govern
gravity and electromagnetism and
newtonian mechanics right we're just
going to try to figure out
what the laws
that govern this are
so
what is what is the right decision what
is the wrong decision
what do y'all think chat how do you know
if you're making the right decision or
the wrong decision
okay so i'm going to tell you all a
story
so i had a patient about
let me make sure i get this right about
seven
six years ago
that was in a
um
was
in a competitive work environment
and um they were
they were scheduled for a meeting so
there was a promotion opening up
and they were in a very competitive and
work environment they had a colleague
that they disliked
and they
were scheduled for a meeting to lobby
for the promotion okay
so the morning the meeting was at like
10 30 or something so they they get to
their office
and um
at about 9 15 they get a call that their
father has fainted and so they really
don't have a choice but they're they're
you know so they have to leave they have
to cancel the meeting they're really
kind of frustrated with themselves
in a sense they don't really blame their
father but they're kind of blaming their
father because
um
you know they're missing this meeting
they're also have like playing doomsday
scenarios in their mind that oh like now
that like i i miss this meeting like you
know
my colleague who i dislike will get the
promotion i'm gonna have to report into
them like there's a lot of doomsday in
their head
and so they go home they they take care
of their dad they take their dad to the
emergency room they spend the bulk of
the day there they miss their meeting
you know their colleague has the meeting
so the the person is kind of screwed
um they're sitting in the emergency room
uh
room with their dad watching the
television
when they see that something has
happened
and that it turns out that
a plane has flown into the building
where they work
and it happened to be september 11th
2001.
and so this person
was so upset about the promotion real
story by the way so at mclean hospital
they have a program a trauma program for
first responders
and i was running groups with this
program
um when i ended up meeting this person
and they sort of shared this story with
me
and
turns out that if they had been in the
office that day
they wouldn't be alive
and so like you know it really struck me
like so we had a long conversation about
karma real story 100
um so we had a conversation about
karma
and
you know
what's good for you and what's not good
for you and this person was really
fantastic they were sharing a lot of
their perspective about what they
learned from this experience
and so it really makes me wonder like
what is the right decision and what is
the wrong decision right so how do you
measure it
like
how do you measure it right how do you
know if you're making the right decision
or the wrong decision so i'll give you
guys like another example so this is
like a personal one that i'm sure y'all
have heard before so there's no
situation in which a 4.0 is inferior to
a 2.5 right like you always want a 2.5
gpa you never want a 4.0 gpa
and when i was in school i was sure that
i was making all the wrong decisions
like i was sleeping through spanish
class
got an f in spanish chat first semester
of freshman year first f
gg
and so you you can't think in that
moment you're thinking oh this is the
wrong decision like i should have gotten
an a right because an a is better but it
turns out that if people who are
struggling to find motivation
on the internet
if they listen to someone who's gotten a
4.0 their entire life
they're going to have trouble relating
to that person or the person who's
gotten a 4.0 their entire life will have
trouble relating to them
and so it's kind of bizarre but like we
just don't know what the right decisions
are or the wrong decisions you can even
logically like even if you step away
from my two visceral examples and you
say dr k you're you're not
forming a good enough argument
so then i'm curious like genuinely
forget about what i say
what are the metrics that you measure a
decision by right is it what happens in
the future so then the question is kind
of interesting because it's like
you know like even if circumstances like
if i
you know if i drive drunk for example
and i don't get into an accident
is that the right decision or the wrong
decision to drive drunk because there
was no consequence
right so do you measure a right decision
or wrong decision by the consequence
well that's kind of interesting because
it doesn't feel to me that like i think
driving drunk is always bad like
irrespective of whether you dodge a
bullet or not
and so how do you measure what is this
idea of right decision or wrong decision
really think about that if you're
paralyzed because you're trying to make
the right decision how the f would you
even know
what does that mean for you what does it
mean to you to make the right decision
and what nyani yog that's what nyan yogg
sort of teaches is ask yourself where do
you get this concept
of a right decision or wrong decision
and now it turns out that the concept
comes from a couple of different places
so the truth of the matter is that
there are two things going on here if
you're stuck in making the right
decision versus wrong decision two two
issues at play
one is like a cognitive challenge or
problem
called the planning fallacy
and the second is the way that we're
conditioned so the first thing to
understand is the planning fallacy and
this is why you can't make the right
decision
so
people want to make plans why do you
want to make a plan you want to make a
plan so that you end up
things end up going well right that's
why you want to make the right decisions
so you plan out
what decisions you're going to make so
you end up in the place that you want to
go that's what a right decision is
the problem is that when do you make a
plan you make a plan at the beginning
and
how much information do you have at the
beginning you have the least information
end you have the most information
therefore when can you make the best
plan the best plan can be made at the
end and the worst plan can be made at
the beginning
therefore in a weird way
any plan that you make kind of
projecting into the future it's not
technically true this way but it's the
planning fallacy
it's just this idea that when you try to
make a plan like if you're trying to
figure out what you want to measure at
the age of 18 and you feel locked into
that
you don't understand anything about the
careers that you're committing to right
like you don't understand like if you
major in pre-med you have no idea what
it's like to be a doctor and this is a
prime example of the planning fallacy
that when you make plans you have the
least amount of information therefore
they end up being the worst plans that
you could by definition make because you
don't have enough information
the best decision the best way to figure
out what you should major in college is
to go to college 40 years figure out
what the right major is go back in time
and tell your 18 year old self hey this
is what you'll major in because it'll
work for you
but we can't do that that's the planning
fallacy this is the first thing that
you're paralyzing yourself with
the second thing is that we're
conditioned so why is it so hard okay so
then like the answer to the planning
fallacy is to iterate right so the right
move is like you can't figure everything
out from day zero so you collect
information over time and you course
correct so like you have to iterate like
i'm gonna try majoring in this and i'm
gonna recognize
that this may not be the right choice
and then i will adjust and adapt
but we can't do that right so then the
question is like why can't we just like
if i were to tell you hey man just adapt
iterate you know it's not going to be
perfect first time around you'll get
there eventually
why is that so hard for people to
implement because it is right i can say
that but it's not like people are just
gonna do it
and that's because of our conditioning
so this is unfortunate but society
conditions us to be
perfect and fast so we're conditioned
into thinking that society and life is a
race
okay so the interesting thing is that
society doesn't actually reward
competence they reward speed to
competence
let me give you an example
so
if i
let's say i'm in a class like let's say
i have a math class okay and the math
class has three tests and a final
and let's say that the final as a proper
final exam covers all of the material
throughout the whole year so it has
every single thing that i've learned in
the math class that gets tested in a
final that's why it's called a final
exam
so the grading for the class is that the
first test is worth 20 the second test
is worth twenty percent the third test
is worth twenty percent that's sixty
percent final is worth forty percent
super normal situation
so let's say that i didn't understand
anything in the first test didn't
understand anything in the second test
didn't understand anything in the third
test
something happened in my mind i crammed
i learned all of the math that i'm
supposed to and i get 100 on the final
and i got zeros on the first three tests
do i pass the class or do i fail the
class
even though i may know the most math out
of everyone in the class and i've
mastered all the concepts of mathematics
even though i get 100 on the final i
still fail the class
and it's the kid who got 80
the whole way through that passes the
class
right so even though technically i know
more mathematics than they do
i fail when they pass
so our system
is designed for rapid
progression to perfection it's not about
learning everything it's about
being impervious to making mistakes
our society conditions us
to not make mistakes and not iterate it
demands perfection from the get-go how
do you become valedictorian of your high
school why do we care about
valedictorians do valedictorians know
the most maybe not we have no idea
that's not what valedictorian measures
what valedictorian measures is who has
been perfect from day one who has been
the most perfect the fastest and most
consistently that's actually what life
rewards
or that's what society rewards i should
say not life so this is why
valedictorians are more competitive to
get into college right so once again if
you're at the top of your class in high
school then you get into a better
college if you get into a better college
then you're going to get a better job if
you get a better job you're going to
make more money if you make more money
you're going to be more attractive to
people to mate with
and then you'll end up having your
choice and a better choice of who you
end up marrying and if you marry the
right person then you're going to have
better kids and now we see that since
society has conditioned us this way
there's no room for mistakes why it's so
damn paralyzing to not to to make a
choice
because if you don't board that train
because that's what life is right it's a
train you board the fast train you're on
the fast track in life it's a race right
so oh yeah like i want my kid so my
parents wanted me to skip a grade so i
skipped a grade and i was like okay fine
and then like i started school when i
was young
and then like
sucked at sports
and then they want you to race through
life as quickly as possible
everyone wants to take ap classes in
high school so they can graduate from
college in three years and now there's
even abbreviated med schools that are
three years instead of four inside in
the u.s
so now at the age of 24 i can graduate
from medical school i can finish my
training at the age of 28
right
being a psychiatrist
everyone thinks it's a little and what
happens after 28 like what then then
i've won i've won the game of life
and i won at 28
which is better than winning at 40
obviously
because then you start living at 20.
it's like wait a minute hold on what
so our society conditions us
to be terrified of making the wrong
choice
absolutely terrified because it punishes
us
from before making the wrong choice and
that punishment sits with us for the
rest of our life right it's like once
you get one f in a class your gpa is
forever ruined there's no way to escape
your mistake
and now we wonder why are so many young
people
terrified of making the wrong choice
it's because they've grown up in a
society that does not
let them make mistakes
it doesn't matter what you actually end
up understanding so thankfully medicine
is a little bit different
somewhere along the way medicine realize
like in residency you don't have grades
just think about this residence is when
you actually learn medicine you no
longer have grades there's no grade
residency is when you're taking care of
heart attacks you're learning how to
take care of heart attacks you're
learning how to deal with narcissists
you're learning how to deal with addicts
you're learning how to deal with
people who are you know having asthma
learning how to talk to pre-diabetics
this is when you're actually learning
how to save lives
and there's no grades why because grades
don't matter at that point it's not
about the grade
grades are a way to measure against
your colleagues
it's a way to differentiate human beings
it's an approximation of differentiation
it's a way for people who are reviewing
applications to say this person is
better than this person that is the
purpose of a grade
once it actually comes to saving lives
no one cares
do you guys know like think about your
doctor if you all have a good doctor do
you know what their grades were do you
care what their grades are does anyone
care what their grades are
does anyone care that they were
valedictory of their high school no one
cares because at that point there's a
real world consequence
so we get paralyzed because we have been
conditioned
on a system that does not relate to
reality
it doesn't really matter
and so now this is like we see like why
you're so paralyzed because you just
like because the consequences will live
with you for the rest of your life
so let's look at this
paralyzed by making fear of the wrong
life choices
right
and then like you don't even truly know
what you want anymore because you're so
paralyzed by making the wrong choice
even if you you you knew what you wanted
at some point
but then you were afraid it was the long
wrong choice so then you started the
process of convincing yourself that you
didn't even want it
and then you're confused by what you
want because you knew what you want then
you killed it inside you
because it was the wrong choice
and now you're confused you're
directionless like what do i do i don't
even know what i want yeah that's
because
you took it out back
and asked it
because i fear that i might start
something and end up not liking it and
there'll be no way to get out of it
where do you think this attitude comes
from it comes from gpas because if you
make an f
that'll live with you for the rest of
your life if you fall behind in the race
of life if you're 23 and graduating from
college there's no way you will ever
catch up to the 22 year olds who
graduated from college time is limited
the sand in the hourglass has run out
and you are screwed
paralyzed with indecision
so what does neon yog say non-yogg says
first understand this
first and foremost
and then understand is this actually
true
so evaluate it for yourself is there a
right decision or a wrong decision
can i end up screwed in life and the
short answer is yes you can so then nyan
yogg says what are you going to do about
it let us assume that it is possible
that you can make the wrong choice which
i'm not even sure is correct but
yan yoga will still say so be it this is
a fact of life
that you could be screwed you could make
the wrong choice any building that you
walk into
could collapse on your head
it's possible what are you going to do
about it yan yoga will then ask you how
are we going to live in this world of
uncertainty
and this is where like all the yogis
they get back to living in the present
right so make the best choice you can
today
iterate recognize that's where iteration
comes from iteration is making the best
choice you can today
recognizing that it may be the wrong
choice it may be a stupid choice but
you'll figure that out tomorrow and then
you're going to make the best choice you
can tomorrow
and then over time you will learn how to
make the right choices
which i recognize is sort of a paradox
because we're saying there isn't the
right choice
but it's almost like a game of texas
hold'em
right where like
you're like
you get your first two cards
and you don't know what the flop is
gonna be
you know
you don't know what the turn is going to
be you don't know what the river is
going to be so you make a bet based on
the knowledge that you have
the flop shows up some cards show up oh
my god
boy did i screw up you adjust
accordingly
then the turn then the river and then
you may win and you may lose but the
cool thing is that even though the poker
players don't can't they can never see
the future they can never see the flop
they never do and yet some people are
good at poker and some people are bad at
poker how do poker players get good
they start to learn okay this is how
much i should do here this is how much i
should do here they learn how to live
with uncertainty they learn how to make
probabilistic bets
and that's all you can do in life that's
what it means to make
to live in the present moment you're
making a probabilistic bet
and this is why it's hard for people who
are trying to make the right choice
people who make their trying to make the
right choice are basically doing one of
these video game runs with one
hp it's like one hp and you wipe
their strategy is to be perfect from day
one right it's 4.0 in high school 4.0 in
college 4.0 in med school
that's their strategy
is the no hit run
right that's what they want to do
but that's not a very reliable strategy
what's far more reliable is to tank up
and find some healing pots
and then just take the damage and heal
up and keep going it's far more reliable
that is the iterative strategy that is
living in the present moment so make the
best decision that you can today
recognize that there's no such thing as
the right decision or the wrong decision
there's only the best decision you can
make today and then you may be paralyzed
you're like oh my god what is the best
decision i make today oh my god how do i
know which one's best
next thing nyan yog tells you is there's
no such thing as a best decision just
make a decision make the one that feels
the best to you right now
right that's what neon yog says
and then you're like okay but what if it
goes wrong and then yan yog says then it
goes wrong
and then you adjust tomorrow but what if
i'm screwed then you're screwed you
can't prevent being screwed you can just
try to not be screwed that's the most
that you can do
now one other thing
to point out
okay before we jump into the meditation
um as a kid i was easily overwhelmed and
would often have this feeling of time
running out and then i would throw this
tantrum because i felt trapped as if the
walls were closing in on me
today this is this feeling persists in
my decision making though not as
strongly
so
is there something that will help with
this so this is that's
now we're gonna go in a different
direction okay
this chat is what we call a sum scar
so some scar is a ball of undigested
emotion that lives within us
and activates at particular times and
interferes with the function of our mind
so this person
has this fear from a young age that
prevents them from making decisions over
time
what they've learned how to do is
suppress that feel fear they've kept it
from so their brain is developed enough
to where they no longer throw a tantrum
but the core of the feeling is still
there so this is something if you guys
have watched dr k's guide and you've
looked at the vedic psychology thing and
you've you guys have watched falling
behind fantasy trap or any of those
other like depression uh videos right so
these are the videos that explore the
common like
complexes that people will experience
that lead to depression
so if you all have watched that you'll
recognize this as a samskar
and this is the wild thing is that as
long as you that some scar exists within
your mind you will continue to have this
feeling and if you truly want to be free
of this you have to digest that some
scar you have to go to the root of the
fear why do you feel trapped
your mind has learned that if you don't
make the right decision you're going to
get trapped it is learn that lesson and
so any time you try to make a a decision
there's a voice in your head that says
don't make that decision we're not sure
it's right we don't want to be trapped
so even if you try to live in the
present there's something within your
mind that says no no no living the
present is an idiotic idea
this whole living in the present thing
what if you screw up then we're gonna
have to live with it for the rest of our
lives and we'll be trapped
there's a sensation of making a decision
and becoming trapped by that decision
that comes from somewhere you weren't
well
that comes from a some scar there's
absolutely a process to discover and
digest that some scar it's much more
complicated we offer you an introduction
in dr k's guide
the thing to understand is that some
scar comes from an experience and this
is where depending on either you can
find the experience
or the yogis have hypothesized that it
could come from a past life
so if you were born this way
there's still a some scar right because
there's a clear set of programming that
activates in your mind almost like
malware in a particular situation
just because you cannot psychologically
find the root of it in this life doesn't
mean that it doesn't exist and this is
where i don't even know how to explain
this but i just know it's true
that as a psychotherapist i have
processed i've done trauma processing
work
with people
for things that have never happened to
them
that is the best way i can describe it
so i've processed non-existing traumas
for my patients and it works wonderfully
clinically they improve drastically so
one interpretation of this is that there
is something that is from a past life
and in my
i i don't know that that's i don't think
it's evidence for that by the way so i
think what's just as equally likely is
that they had some kind of experience
like some kind of imaginary experience
very young like maybe they were two
years old and they watched a movie and
that movie was so emotionally engaging
it essentially traumatized them
maybe they just forgot the experience
and can't recall it because memory isn't
perfect there are all kinds of things a
lot of people will jump to past lives
and reincarnation as a scientist i don't
think i can do that
i think what i would rather conclude is
what i did which is that
processing traumas that did not ever
happen to a person that they can recall
seems to be clinically beneficial
that is the statement i'm happy to stand
behind
so
could be a some scar from a past life
who knows right that depends on your own
world view what you choose to believe
what you choose to explore
and so at the end of the day you have to
deal with that root of if i make the
wrong decision i will feel trapped where
did you learn that what does that mean
for you
be a nyani yogi and explore that
the last thing that i'll leave y'all
with
is a meditation of sorts so one is you
can do the path of nyanyog that's
meditation number one which is to ask
yourself what is the right decision and
what is a wrong decision try to get as
precise of an answer as you can
don't give up
give me the definition of a right
decision or wrong decision and how can i
make the right decision or wrong
decision
i want you all to like
anyone who comes up with a good answer
post it on the subreddit if you think
you have found the correct answer post
it
let's see what the community can come up
with how do you know how can you make
the right decision and how can you make
the wrong decision that is the question
so that's an exercise of nyan yoga the
second thing
kind of out of left field
so i want you to close your eyes for a
moment and say to yourself i am that
say it to yourself three times
i am that
so now what i want you all to do is go
ahead and open your eyes
and then anytime you are struggling with
something
say to yourself that is you
that thing that you are struggling with
i am that
so i know it sounds kind of weird
so if you're struggling with another
person say to yourself that i am that
that is a part of me that human being is
a part of who i am i am that person if
you're struggling with making a decision
what major to use or to pick
i am that
i am
choosing a major
not like i am
not like the verb
i am the thing of choosing a major that
complex that decision making process
that is what i am
it's kind of weird i want you all to
practice it for a while it's a more
advanced technique of meditation but
repeat to yourself i am that see the
part of yourself in that external thing
as best as you can
start to realize that there is no
difference between you and another
person there's no difference between you
and a cop
and that comes from i am that
you